# 25.9.18 computational physics B

## class 1

- RT instability (linear)
  - linear growth rate $\gamma_{RT} $ depends on the wave number, which is similar to the $ \omega(k)$ relation.
  - $ Q = Q_0 + \delta Q $, where $ \delta Q = e^{i(kx- \omega t)}$ is in plane wave form.
  - fastest growth are in the shortest wavelength.

- RT instabilty (non-linear)
  - saturation vs runaway
  - Why saturation? --> $ \gamma_{grow} \sim \gamma_{damp}$ 
    - Q1. But where does damping come from? And why does this increase intensity when chaos stronger?
      - turbulent damping --> turbulence power spectrum, when the scale becomes small, the energy damped to thermal energies.
      - something different: magnetic field tension, 2D wave
    - non-linear stage is the crucial stage which we focus on.
  - example for RT instability
    - supernova surroundings with finger-like structure

- How to quantify instability in numerical simulation?
  - amplitude of the bubble $ h(t) $
  - the strength of turbulence --> mean field theory, deviation of the turbulence velocity $ \delta u_{turb} $
    - only looks at some direction of the velocity field, can ??
    - $ v= \nabla \phi + \nabla \times \vec{A}  $ , the first term is the compressible part, the second term is the solenoidal part.
      - for example, if the compressible part is large, the star formation is easier.
  - power spectrum
    - use the characteristic strength of the turbulence power spectrum to quantify the instability.

## class 2

- How to convert continuous fluid into simulations?
  - discretization for spatial and temporal domain.
    - grid-based method
      - finite volume method (FVM)
        - uniform grid vs non-uniform grid
        - static mesh refinement vs adaptive mesh refinement(the refinement will change with the motion of our object) 
    - Eulerian --> the change rate of some fluid quantity at a fixed point in space. $ (\frac{\partial \phi}{\partial t})_{\vec x} $
      - the fluid dynamic equations only suit for fluid themselves, when there exists source or sink terms, we may need to consider other physical processes.
  - discretization by mass
    - particle-based method 
      - Lagrangian --> the change rate of some fluid quantity moving with the fluid. $ \frac{d \phi}{dt} = (\frac{\partial \phi}{\partial t})_{\vec x} + \vec{v} \cdot \nabla \phi $
        - a particle moving with the fluid --> total derivative $ \frac{d}{dt} = \frac{\partial }{\partial t} + \vec{v} \cdot \nabla $, the second term is the advection term.
        - the fluid dynamic equations become ODEs, and is easier to solve.
        - smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) --> Gizmo